DOCS-662/555/391: SLAM service refactor (#1049)
viamrobotics/docs: docs/services/slam/cartographer/_index.md

How you configure `cartographer` depends on whether you want the SLAM service to build your map with data collected live by a [RPLIDAR](https://www.slamtec.com/en/Lidar/A3) or with LIDAR data provided in a dataset at runtime.

Select from the following modes to obtain the correct instructions to configure the service:

{{% tabs name="Modes"%}}
{{% tab name="Live Data Collection" %}}

{{% alert title="REQUIREMENTS" color="tip" %}}

Running `cartographer` in Live Data Collection mode requires a [RPLIDAR A1](https://www.slamtec.com/en/Lidar/A1) or [RPLIDAR A3](https://www.slamtec.com/en/Lidar/A3) LIDAR scanning device.

Before adding a SLAM service, you must follow [these instructions](/program/extend/modular-resources/add-rplidar-module/) to add your RPLIDAR device as a modular component of your robot.

{{% /alert %}}

<br>

### Add a SLAM Service

{{< tabs name="Add the Cartographer Service Live">}}
{{% tab name="Config Builder" %}}

Go to your robot's page on the [Viam app](https://app.viam.com/).
Navigate to the **config** tab on your robot's page, and click on the **Services** subtab.

Add a service with type `slam`, model `cartographer`, and a name of your choice:

> ![adding cartographer slam service](../img/run_slam/add-cartographer-service-ui.png)

Reviewer: would you mind retaking this screenshot and making the window less wide before taking it so it's more legible on small width screens?

Author: done!

| `min_covered_area` | The minimum overlapping area, in square meters, for an old submap to be considered for deletion. | Optional | `1.0` | Only for [UPDATING mode](#mapping-modes). |
| `min_added_submaps_count` | The minimum number of added submaps before deletion of the old submap is considered. | Optional | `1` | Only for [UPDATING mode](#mapping-modes). |
| `occupied_space_weight` | Emphasis to put on scanned data points between measurements. | Optional | `20.0` | |
| `translation_weight` | Emphasis to put on expected translational change from pose extrapolator data between measurements. | Optional | `10.0` | |
| `rotation_weight` | Emphasis to put on expected rotational change from pose extrapolator data between measurements. | Optional | `1.0` | |

## Troubleshooting

### Tip: Lidar Mounting for the Viam Rover

If you have a Viam Rover and need a mount for your RPLidar, you can 3D print an adapter plate.
The STL file for an adapter plate is available on [GitHub](https://github.com/viamrobotics/VR1-22-A001/blob/master/CAD/RPIidar_adapter.STL).

### Known Issues

#### Maps not appearing in UI

> When generating a larger map, the Cartographer service can take a while to return and visualize the map.

Author: ```suggestion
When generating a larger map, it will take longer for Cartographer to return the desired map.
This can result in errors or failed requests for a map; however, this will not affect the `viam-server` or `cartographer` process.
Re-requesting the map can and should be successful, although there is currently a fundamental limit for the size of map that can be transmitted to the UI and this issue will become more common as you approach it.
```

> Reducing the frequency the Cartographer service returns the map by adjusting **Refresh frequency** should help the map visualization to appear consistently.

Author: ```suggestion
```

| `min_covered_area` | The minimum overlapping area, in square meters, for an old submap to be considered for deletion. | Optional | `1.0` | Only for [UPDATING mode](#mapping-modes). |
| `min_added_submaps_count` | The minimum number of added submaps before deletion of the old submap is considered. | Optional | `1` | Only for [UPDATING mode](#mapping-modes). |
| `occupied_space_weight` | Emphasis to put on scanned data points between measurements. | Optional | `20.0` | |
| `translation_weight` | Emphasis to put on expected translational change from pose extrapolator data between measurements. | Optional | `10.0` | |
| `rotation_weight` | Emphasis to put on expected rotational change from pose extrapolator data between measurements. | Optional | `1.0` | |

## Troubleshooting

### Tip: Lidar Mounting for the Viam Rover

If you have a Viam Rover and need a mount for your RPLidar, you can 3D print an adapter plate.
The STL file for an adapter plate is available on [GitHub](https://github.com/viamrobotics/VR1-22-A001/blob/master/CAD/RPIidar_adapter.STL).

### Known Issues

> #### Maps not appearing in UI

Author: @jeremyrhyde

When generating a larger map, it will take longer for Cartographer to return the desired map.
This can result in errors or failed requests for a map, however, this will not affect the `viam-server` or `cartographer` process.
Re-requesting the map can and should be successful, although there is currently a fundamental limit for the size of map that can be transmitted to the UI and this issue will become more common as you approach it.

> 

Author: ```suggestion
```

tags: ["slam", "services"]
# SMEs: Kat, Jeremy
---

[The Cartographer Project](https://github.com/cartographer-project) performs dense SLAM using LIDAR data.

## Requirements

Install the binary required to utilize the `cartographer` library on your machine and make it executable by running the following commands according to your machine's architecture:

{{< tabs >}}
{{% tab name="Linux aarch64" %}}

```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
sudo curl -o /usr/local/bin/carto_grpc_server http://packages.viam.com/apps/slam-servers/carto_grpc_server-stable-aarch64.AppImage
sudo chmod a+rx /usr/local/bin/carto_grpc_server
```

{{% /tab %}}
{{% tab name="Linux x86_64" %}}

```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
sudo curl -o /usr/local/bin/carto_grpc_server http://packages.viam.com/apps/slam-servers/carto_grpc_server-stable-x86_64.AppImage
sudo chmod a+rx /usr/local/bin/carto_grpc_server
```

{{% /tab %}}
{{% tab name="MacOS" %}}

```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
brew tap viamrobotics/brews && brew install carto-grpc-server
```

{{% /tab %}}
{{< /tabs >}}

## Configuration

> How you configure `cartographer` depends on whether you want the SLAM service to build your map with data collected live by a [Rplidar](https://www.slamtec.com/en/Lidar/A1) or with LIDAR data provided in a dataset at runtime.

Author: done!

| `config_params` |  map[string] string | Optional | Parameters specific to the `model` of SLAM library. |

{{% alert title="Caution" color="caution" %}}

- If `use_live_data: true`, `delete_processed_data: true` by default.
- If `use_live_data: false`, `delete_processed_data: false` by default.

Setting `delete_processed_data: true` and `use_live_data: false` is invalid and will result in an error.
{{% /alert %}}

{{% /tab %}}
{{% tab name="config_params" %}}

Adjust these parameters to fine-tune the algorithm `cartographer` utilizes in aspects like submap size, mapping update rate, and feature matching details:

| Parameter Mode | Description | Inclusion | Default Value | Notes |
| -------------- | ----------- | --------- | ------------- | ----- |
| `mode` | `2d` | **Required** | None | |
| `optimize_every_n_nodes` | How many trajectory nodes are inserted before the global optimization is run. | Optional | `3` | |
| `num_range_data` | Number of measurements in each submap. | Optional | `100` | |

> | `missing_data_ray_length` | Replaces the length of ranges that are further than max_range with this value. | Optional | `25` | Nominally set to max length. |

Reviewer 2: [nit/opt]
```suggestion
| `missing_data_ray_length` | Replaces the length of ranges that are further than `max_range` with this value. | Optional | `25` | Nominally set to max length. |
```

| `max_range` | Maximum range of valid measurements. | Optional | `25` | |
| `min_range` | Minimum range of valid measurements. | Optional | `0.2` | |
| `max_submaps_to_keep` | Number of submaps to use and track for localization. | Optional | `3` | Only for [LOCALIZING mode](#mapping-modes). |
| `fresh_submaps_count` | Length of submap history considered when running SLAM in updating mode. | Optional | `3` | Only for [UPDATING mode](#mapping-modes). |
| `min_covered_area` | The minimum overlapping area, in square meters, for an old submap to be considered for deletion. | Optional | `1.0` | Only for [UPDATING mode](#mapping-modes). |

> | `min_added_submaps_count` | The minimum number of added submaps before deletion of the old submap is considered. | Optional | `1` | Only for [UPDATING mode](#mapping-modes). |

Reviewer 2: [nit] The links to LOCALIZING mode and UPDATING mode don't link to the mode descriptions. They link to the top of the page

Author: Have fixed!

| `rotation_weight` | Emphasis to put on expected rotational change from pose extrapolator data between measurements. | Optional | `1.0` | Normalized with translational and occupied. |

{{% /tab %}}
{{< /tabs >}}

## View the Map

After saving your config and connecting to your robot, navigate to the **control** tab on your robot's page and click on the drop-down menu matching the `name` of the service you created.

Change the **Refresh frequency** to your desired frequency.
If in Live Data mode, move your Rplidar around slowly.
Watch a map start to appear.

{{% alert title="Note" color="note" %}}
It might take a couple of minutes before a map is displayed.
Keep moving the camera slowly within your space and wait for the map to visualize.
{{% /alert %}}

## Troubleshooting

### Tip: Lidar Mounting for the Viam Rover

If you have a Viam Rover and need a mount for your RPLidar, you can 3D print an adapter plate.
The STL file for an adapter plate is available on [GitHub](https://github.com/viamrobotics/VR1-22-A001/blob/master/CAD/RPIidar_adapter.STL).

### Known Issues

> #### Maps JPEG not appearing in UI
> 
> When generating a larger map, it can take a while for the Cartographer service to return the `JPEG` map.
> 
> Reducing the frequency the Cartographer service returns the map by adjusting **Refresh frequency** should help the JPEG visualization to appear consistently.

Reviewer 2: [nit] The maps are now not JPEG anymore. In the UI, they're titled "View SLAM Map (2D)". The same issue is true for 3D, though. I will suggest an alternative text - feel free to modify it, though!

```suggestion
#### Maps not appearing in UI

When generating a larger map, the Cartographer service can take a while to return and visualize the map.

Reducing the frequency the Cartographer service returns the map by adjusting **Refresh frequency** should help the map visualization to appear consistently.
```

Author: lgtm done!

#### Dataset mode produces an error

If there is a saved map in <file>data_dir/map</file> and saved data in <file>data_dir/data</file> from a previous run, then running SLAM with an existing dataset may raise an error at startup since the data has already been incorporated into the map.

If that occurs, you can clear <file>data_dir/map</file> and restart the service.

> You can find additional assistance in the [Troubleshooting section](/appendix/troubleshooting/).

Author: Should be good in prod, absolute links have issues in staging but not in production

---
title: "Cartographer Integrated Library"
linkTitle: "cartographer"
weight: 70
type: "docs"
description: "Configure a SLAM service with the Cartographer library."

> tags: ["slam", "services"]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
tags: ["slam", "services"]
empty_node: true
```

this will make the page just a toggle on the side bar.

I'd suggest moving the paragraph onto each page with an include or onto the SLAM page. That's then fewer clicks for the user and the information stays together.

However, that may not be the correct thing to do. Between the live mode and offline mode there's now a lot of duplication. Would it make more sense to put the differing data between live mode and offline mode into tabs and otherwise keep everything on one cartographer page?

Introducing Life and offline is something I think we still need to do better, right?

Author: @npentrel Yeah, I was thinking about that as well and that seems like a good idea. I'll see if I can make it work without looking too messy (+ moving the data_dir and mapping info into duplicates on the library pages)

Author: @npentrel Is this change still necessary? Sorry I am not sure as to original suggestion

Reviewer: no - this was an either or :) - looking good I think
